D:\Pawan pathak\PDF\THE HIMALAYAN GAZETTEER
Chapter 4-169-210p.pdf

The Outer Himalaya
 
We have seen that the torm 'outer himalaya' has different meanings 

according to the sense in which it is used. Geographlevation than the outer range. Between China and Dhakuri Binhyuak, on 

the road to Pindari  glacier, a distance of forty-five miles as the crow 

flies, there is on peak having  an elevation of 8,000 feet. and very few  

attaining to 7,000 feet. But further  westward, in the same parnllel, we 

have groups of peak attaining an elevation of over 10,000 feet, notably 

those connnected with the Dudu-ka toli range in Garhwal. when the river 

valleys cloes to the snowy range are reached, the increase in elevation is 

rapid and marketed. The flanking ranges seldom fall below 10,000 feet.  and 

are crowned with peaks rising still higher, until culminting ridge crowned 

with perpetual snow is mot.     
 

Mountain System

If we carefully examine the great sea of mountains lying between the outer 

Himalaya and the snows, we shall find that the dominating ranges are spurs 

from the  grent groupd of peaks, remarkable alike for their elevation and 

the position they fill as the boundaries of the serveral river-basing. On 

the west, the westean boundary of Jumna system is found in the olevated 

ridgo that has its origin in the groups of peaks crossed by the Shatul and 

Burenda passes.
Jumna system
 This ridge follows the left bank of the Satlaj in a south-

westerly direction to Hatu (10,000 feet), where it bifurcates: one branch 

continuing 
 
The nornal direction to Bilaspur,and the second proceeding in a south-

eastery direction by Chor (12,081 feet), where it forins the water- parting 

between the Giri and the Pabar branch of the Tons. A second great ridgs, 

descending from the Jamnotri groups, and marked by the Deoban (9,847 feet), 

Chakratn (7,428 Feet), Chilmeri (7,180 feet), and Bairat (7,428 feet) peaks 

in British territory, separates the affluents of the Tons from thoes of the 

Jumna. The eastren boundary of the Jumna system is Formed by a great rigge 

having its origin in the same groups of peaks, and which join as outer     
   

OF THE NORTH-WESTENN PROVINOES    
171

Himalaya near the Sarkanda peak to the east of Masuri (Mussooree).



Ganges system


The eastern boundary of the Ganges system is found in the great ridge 

descending in a south-westerly direction from the Nandakot peak, and which 

passes along the life bank of the pindar to its junction  with the 

Alaknada, and thence along the life bank of Alaknada to Deoprayag. It 

admits of tow great bifurcations: one at head of the katyur valley and one 

at the head of the Lohba valley. 



kali

From the group of the peak at the head of the Katyur valley branch passes 

in a south-westery direction though Bissar and Dol and along the right bank 

of the Ladhiya to Barindeo on the Sarda, and from the head of the Lohba 

valley a brach runs south-by-east to Gujargarh, where it passed almost due 

west to the Ganges at kharak and Chandi.The trak to the south of these tow 

arms is in shape a great obtuseangled triangle, with its base towards the 

plains and its apex in the group of hills to the north of Dwarahat, It 

froms the mountains  basin of the western  Ramganga. The eastern boundary   

of this system forms the western boundary of the Kali system, of which the 

eastern boundary is found in a great ridge descending  from the Api peak  

Doti of Nepal. It is clear  from the above brief description that is the 

spurs from the snowy rango that bound the river basins, and  if we further 

the affluents of each system, we shall see that the ramification from these 

spurs from the water-parting between each minor system. 



Subo inate boundaries


The pricipal affluents  of the Jumna system are the Tons and the Giri. The 

Pabar, Rupin, supin unite to from the Tons., and are separated From each 

other by transverse ridges descending from the great boundary ridge. United 

they drain a delta-shaped basin having its apex  at Kalsi. To the south-

west the Giri  drains a similarly shaped basin having its apex near 

Kalsi,and to the east the Jumna drains one having its apex at Kalsi. We 

find that point of junction of the spices of these three deltaic basins 

lies  within the Siwaliks, the outer range of geographer,and the union of 

these three main affluents forms the Jumna of the plains. This basin, as 

well as the minor system within it, is bounded by spurs from the great 

anowy range or transverse ridge descending from them. 

tow river drain a dalta -shaped tract having its apex at Deoprayag. The Sarswati and Dhauli, which from the head-waters of the Alaknanda, are separated from each other by a ridge of snowy peak, and its more southern affluments, the Nandakini and the Pindar, are divided from each other by a great ridge descending from Trisul. the entire basin of the Alaknanda to its junetion with Bhagirathi at Deoprayag is thus a great Delta-shaped tract,cut up by the minor feeder into subordinate system that are bounded by great ridge descending from.the snowy range. Between Deoprayag and Hardwar, the Ganges receives from the east the Nayar and the Himal, and from the westthe Saswa that drains the Dehradun. All unite within the Siwaliks to from the Ganges of the plains 

The nayar.
We shall now take up the compact system of the Nayar in southern Garhwal, which at first sigh-- would  appear to be an exception to the general rule. We find that the Boundary ridge that marks its exent is a continuation of the great ridge that, descending from the snowy peaks of Nandakot, runs along the left bank of the Pindar to the head of the Lohba valley.
			OF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES. 
173
  Here, as  alrealy noticed, this ridge bifurcates ; one branch proceeding the nornal direction along the left bank of the Alaknanda to Deoprayag, whilst the second branch passes south to Gujargarh  and then west to the Ganges at Kharak.these tow branches mark the axis of highest elevation  in the tract through which they pass. Following the western branch, we have the Dubri peak,9,862 feet; Dobri peak 9,862 feet; Gandkhola, 7,553 feet; Devinath, 7,034 feet; Kankwala, 6,651 feet; Gardari, 5,853 feet; jhangnarh, 5,030 feet; and a peak about two miles from Deoprayag, 5,030 feet. Folllowing the southern branch thought Gurjargarh, we find the second, Duda-ka-toli peak with an elevation of 10,180 feet. about the level of the sea; Barmadangi, 9,190 feet.; Nandatopa, 8,086 feet; Khamek, 7,152 feet; Gujargarh, 7,969 feet; Khatti, 8,270 feet; Utain, 6,901 feet; bukari, 6,267 feet; and naugarh , about a mile above Kharak, 6,065 feet; Cloes to the point of bifurcation, the boundary ridge sends a lateral spur southwards,that  divided the basin of the Nayar into tow parts,that drained by the western Nayar or Chhiphalghat river, and that drained by the eastern Nayar or Kainyur stream . This great spur preserves the superior elevation of the boundary ridge, and is marked by the following peak :--Barari, 8,499 Panjing, 8,810 feet; Devitank, 8,849 feet; feet; mutikhal, 7,668 feet; and Chhatargah, 6,790 feet; when it is lost in the valley of the eastern Nayar near Kandui. Short ramifications from this supur or the boundary ridge itsalf determine the course of the minor feeders of the tow great channals of the Nayar system. Thus a transverse ridge from Dubri, marked by the Taro-ka -kand (9,000 feet) and Banjkot 98,203 feet) peaks, divided the Chhiphalghat river near its source from its feeder at Paithani on the left bank,whist other ridges from Gandkhola, Devidatts, and other. A similer rule obtians along couse of the eastern branch, and we thud see that there is no real difference in principal between the arrangement of the drainage system of this apparently abnormal minor basin and that of the other greater system alrealy noticed.                
 
western Ramganga
In the system of the western Ramganga, bowever, we heve an arrangement for
which we find an analogue in that of the Bagati in Nepal.

174     
HIMALAYAN DESTRICTS
As we have already seen, the basin of the ramganga is in shape a great obtuse-angled triangle, with its apex towards the snowy range and its base towards the plains, thus filling up the gap between those system that have their apices towards the plains and their bases towards the snowy range. Of this affluent, the Kosi along has a considerable course within the remainder having their origin in or close above the elevated trect lying along the foot of the hills, and joining the Ramganga at some distance southwards in  the plains. Here, althought the main boundary ridges  are still the spurs descending from the snowy range, the several streams do not unite within the outer range, but like the Bagmati and its affluents, well beyond it in the plains.

Kali
 the is known as the Yankti near its source, as the Kali during the greater portion of its thought the hills, as the chauka or Sarda in the Bhabar and Tarai, and as the Sarju and Ghogra in Oudh to its junction with the Ganges, to the south of the Ghazipur district. the Kali basin is bounded on the west by that of Ganges, andon the south-west by that of the western Ramganga. It receives from the west the Gori, Sarju, and Ladhiya, and from the east some small streams from Nepal, all of which unite within the hill to from the Sarda at Barmdeo. The Sarju is Divided from its affluents, the eastern Ramganga,by a great meridional ridge, Running in a south-easterly Direction from the same group of peaks to Askot, separates the latter river from the Gori. The great Pancha-Chuli range, running south-east from the of water-parting, divides the basin of the Gori from that of the Darma  Yankti, and a similar snowy range having a like origin separates the Darma Yankti from the Kuthi Yankti. The great mass of peak comprising Trisul, Nanda Devi,and Nanda-kot thus send forth great boundary ridges from their entire southern face to the west between the Ramganga and Nandakini : to the south-west between the Nandakini and Pandari and between the Pindar and the Sarju : to the south between the Sarju and the eastern Ramganga : and to the south-east between the last river and the Gori. These indications are sufficient to mark the salient features of this portion of the Himalaya, and we reservc the Details for the Gazetter articles of this notice.
 
OF THE NORTH-WESTENN PROVINOES    
175
the snowy range
The mountain system lying between the snowy range and the plains may therefore be said to consist of an outer parallel to the snowy range and connected with it at wide intervals where it meets the great ridges descending therform. These latter bound the river basin, and the ramifications from them determine the course of the minor feeders of eacyh system. We have now to consiter the snowy range itself.and in these provincse at least ity is a welll-marked feature, lying from ten to twenty miles to the south of the Indian water-parting. The line of snowy peak seen from Nainital and Masuri all lieto the south of the passed by which travellers cross into Tibet. The rote by Nilang in foreign Garhwal through the Jadh valley crosses north of the Kedarnath group ; that by milam in Kumaon behind the Nanda devi group ; and that by the Lanpiya-dhura, also in Komaun, behind the Panchachuli group. the Jadh Ganga runs in a valley parallel to the snowy range and the line of water-parting, at an elevation of 15,000 feet above the level of the sea, near its source at Sumla, but gradually falling to below 9,000 feet at its junction with Bhagirathi, near Bhaironghati. The horizontal distance between these two points is a little over 17 miles, and the fall is therefore over 350 in mile. The Vishnuganga or Saraswati descends from the Mana Pass at 18,000 feet above the level of sea to Vishnuprayag, a distence of some average fill of about 370 feet in the mile. The increase in elevation from the place where the river valley enter the area of greatest elevation is equally marked in the valley of the Dhauli ,the  Gori and the Darma river. Dharchula on the Kali, Before the line of snowy peaks is reached. is only 2,750 feet about the level of the sea; whilst Golam la, to the north and above that line, and about 1,500 to 2,000 feet above the bed of the Kali, is 8,000 feet above the level of the sea.The bed of the Kali at Changrn is 10,000 feet, and in the twenty-five miles between it and the Lanpiya-Dhura Pass the fall is over 8,000 feet, giving an average fall of 400 feet to mile. These facts well illustrate the law that the river beds to within a distance of ten miles in a direct line from the snowy peaks seldom 

HIMALAYAN DESTRICTS
176
exhibit a rise of more than four or five thousand feet ; but when we cross the line on which the great peak are situated,the ascent very rapidly increases, and a very few miles carries the river-bed up to an altitude of line ten thousand feet, thus showing that the sudden increase height of the mountains along this line is not confined to the peak along, but is a general elevation of the whole surface.

Axie of highest elevation 
This sudden and steady rise in elevation when the line of snowy speaks is reached appears to be a well-marked feature of the entire Himalayan range. The snowy peaks, however, do not occur in a continuous ridge. but in masses separated the one from the other by deep depressions that from line of drainage for all the surpkus moisture of the tract between the snowy range and the line of water-parting to the north.These depressions are, so far aswe know,a more distinctive feature of the Indian then of the Turkish slope ofthe Himlaya-Tibetan mass, a fact doubtless due to the greater rainfall received by the former. The influence of the monsoon on the southern slope is shown in its supporting a more dense and varied vegetation, and even on individual ranges and hill the southern exposure is similary strongly marked in Kumaon, It is the ceaseless action of water that has furrowed out in these valley from the great mass, and naturally this has been accomplished on a greater scale and with more results along the southern slope that receives the full force of the periodical rains. The mass of peaks know as the Gangotri, kerdarnath and Badrinath groups, are separated from the next group to the east by the valley of the Saraswati, and this group again from the Nand Devi mass by the Dhauli river.The last is again diviede fron Panchachuli group by the valley of the Gori. and the latter  from the succeeding group by the Darma valley .All these valley are inhabited and cultivated during the summer and rains.and some them are comparativaly of considerable  exent. The massses of snowy peaks are more like the terminal ends of huge spurs descending from the line of water-parting than a continuous ridge. They, however occur in regular sequence along the entire line of Himalaya,and, as seen from the plains, have the appearance of a connected chain. The following table showing the principal peaks that occur throughout some eleven degrces of longitude, will give some idea of their number and importance.
178
Tibetan platcan.
After crossing the line of water-parting  which, as-we have seen, line at the valley heads to the north of the line of snowy peaks, we come upon the great Tibetan platcan which has a mean elevation of from 13,000 to 17,000 feet above the level of the sea. Puling on the plateau by the Nolang route is 13,800 feet, Chiurkung on the Mana route to Titling is 15,700 feet, chitung-dhar on the Unta Dhura route to the Satlaj is 15,810 feet, and Buljuing near the head-water of the Karnali is 15,850 feet ; Rabgyaling is 14,000 ; Gartokh, 14,270 feet ; Tirthapuri, 14,820 feet ;and lake Rakns Tal over 15,000 feet above the level of the sea. Captain H.Strachey has desribed the Tibetan tableland lying between the Indian and Turkish water-partings "as the flat top of a great embankumemt exhibited in all its thiskness in the scarp of the Indian Himalaya ; the summit, though deeply corrrugated with vallley and mountains in detail, being in its general relief laid out hozizoutally at a ' On the physical geography of Western Tibet : Londou, 1854 ' height little inferior to that of its southern scarp. "
 
                OF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES.   179
Although the heighest summits yet known and measured lie along the Indian slope, very lofty peaks have been seen in all parts of the interion, " and the passes which must be corssed to get from one Tibetan valley to another, even in the very central axis of drainage,generally equal those by which Tibet is reached from India : " so that, on the whole, Captain Straechey was of opinion that the despression is but faintly marked in the beds of the great rivers without much affecting the mean elevation of the mass. His desciption of the mountain system of that portion of Tibet lying to the north and west of Kumaon is the best that we possess, and will nsefully conclude our brief review of the features of this portion of the Himalaya-Tibetan mass. :The mountains that compose the bulk of West Nari are not easily understood or defined.On ascending the highest passes we can seldom see anything but a contracted view of mountain tops on all sides, looking very like chaos: no general view of ranges under our feet is over obtainable as the passes naturally select the ravine-heads and lowest points of the range which are not only flanked but often almost surrounded by higher summits : and the valley are commonly so steep and narrow, especiallly in the Rong country, that the view can hardly ever penetrate to an alluvial botttom and the sight of any inhabited place from a pass top unusual. When travelling along the botttoms of the valley, we generally see nething but a narrow tortuous passage between steep rocky walls, shooting out all extended view, and rather concealing than exhibiting the mountain range of which they from but the lowest outworks ; consequently it is only by an extended series of observation and inferences, joined and assisted  by maps, that any regular arrangement of these mountains can be distinctly established, and my account of them is liable to error in proportion to the defects of my own map. The general plan of the mountain system appears to me to consist of a series of parullel ranges running right across the breadth of the tableland in a direction so extremly oblique to the genral extension of the whole as often to confound the one whith the other, or to convert the transverse direction to a longitudinal one. the annexed figurs may help to explain this. shorttransvers necks connecting the main range in some part, and cross fissures cutting through 

180
               HIMALAYAN DISTRICTS
them in others, together with  projecting spurs of a secondary order, will suffice to convert the supposed primary arrangements into all the existing varies of valley and drainage. Such connecting necks, when above 18,000 feet, become more or less confounded with the main ranges, and. if not above 17,000 feet, often appear as low watersheds, just dividing the heads of two valley lying in one line, but draining opposite ways, Secondary  spurs also may be high and so obliquely joined to the primary ranges as to make it difficult to distinguish between the two ; and the cross fissures may sometime admit a main river to pass through a main mountain mass, in which case the continuity of the range is often evidenced by the extreme narrowness of the rocky gorge or height steepness, and geological correspondence of its sides. Much of the Indian watershed seems to be formed in this way.the great snowy peaks lying mostly on the terminal butt-ends of the primary ranges, sometime widened by lateral spurs, and the Tibetan passes crossing the low connecting links, whoes alignment forms the main watershed, but  not the main mountain crest."

Glaciers 
It seems strange that so late as the year 1847 the occurrence of glaciers in the Himalaya was considered a matter of doubt by the learned in Europe. There is now no fact more widely attested and more thoroughly established than the existence of glOF THE NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES.   181
met by the Yarkand Mission on the journey between Leh and Karakoram pass. He mentions the lower Kumdan glacier that comes from the high peaks to the north-west, and continues down the right  bank of the stream for over two miles, "froming a perfect wall of ice, rising from the water about 120 feet, and showing a surface covered with countless pinnacles and point." The Remu  glacier, also seen by Colonel Gordon, rises amongst peaks and ridges from 19,000 to 24,000 feet high. "It is about 21 miles in length and from one to one and three-quarters mile broad, terminating at an elevation of 15,800 feet , above the level of the sea, with a width of about three miles of gigantic cliffs of ice fully 250 feet high." He adds :- "the glacier of the western Himalaya are  twice as extensive as those of the Alps , and are probably the largest in the world, or at all events larger than any others out of the polar regions. One in the Muztagh range is believed to be 34 miles long with fifteen distinct moraines ; while in its immediate vicinity is another ,31 miles in length, which may be said to join with it in making 65 miles of continuous ice. " Other glacier have been descrided by travellers in the range between Ladak and Garhwal. In the tract with which we are more immedintely concerned we have glacier at the head of the Jadh Ganga, the Bhagirathi, Vishnu Ganga, Dhauli, Kailganga, Sundardunga, Pindar, Kuphini, eastern Ram-Ganga Gori and Darma Yankti. Licutenant Weller in his visit to the source of the Gori near Milam, describes that river as coming "out in a small but impetuous stream at the foot of apparently a mass of dirt and gravel some 300 feet high, shaped  like a halfmoon. This is in reality a mass of dark-coloured (bottle-green)ice, extending westwards to a great distance, and covered with stones and fragments of rock which in fack from a succession of small hillls ." Here and there were circular and irregularly shaped craters (as it were) from 50 to 500 feet in diameter at top, and some of tm 150 feet deep, and higher up these gave place to narrow fissures. This    glacier is between seven and eight miles long, and terminates at an elevation of 11,600 feet above the sea. The glacier of the Pindar in Kumaon is the one, howeve, regarding which we have the most complete infomation, and we shall confine ourselves, therefore, to its description in detail.
'J.A.S.,Ben,xi.,1166.aciers at the head of almost evers valley descends from the ranges covered with parpetnal snow. In size and importance they also fity compare with those stupendous peaks around them  that have placed the Himlaya in Gordon gives us illustrations and descriptions off the great glaciers 'Roof of the World,17. 



182 HIMALAYAN DISTRICTS

Glacier of the Pindar. 
The Pindar riveris an affluent of the Alaknanda, and has its rise in a glacier to the west of the Nandakot peak and its valley, where the glacier ends, is about a mile across between the precipitous mountains that bound it. From the foot of the rocks on either side the bottom of the valley slopes inwads with a moderate inclination, leaving in the middle a hollow about 300 yards wide and 250 feet deep, with very steep banks, at the bottom of which flows the river. This comparatively level space between the precipices on either said and the river bed is  observable for a mile or more below the end of  the glacier, though much cut up by watercourses. The glacier occupise  about two-thirds of the whole breadth of the head of this valley,leaving between itself and the oliffs on the east an open grassy slope, which extends along the foot of the river,of the moraine for upwards of a mile and a half about the source and which seems to be a continuation of the level space before montioned. The first appearance of the glacier is thus described :- "It seems to be a vast rounded mass of rocks and  ground utterly devoid of any sing of vegetarion, standing up out of a grassy valley. From the foot of its nearer extremity the river, even here unfordable, rushes in a turbid torrent out of a sort of cave ; the top of which is but a few feet about the surface of the water (May). The end, immediately over the source of the river, is very steep and of a dull black colour. It is considerable fissured, the rents appearing to arise from the lower parts, tearing themselves from upper by their one weight. On a closer examination this  abrupt end proves to be a the channel made by the water that runs down it as it melts. Behind this, the glacier rises less steeply, like a bare gravel  hill., to its full height, which is probubly about 500 feet above the water of the river when it leaves the cave. In some places, however, are seen great fissures both vertical and horizontal, the letter evidently made by the separation of regularly statified layers."

Feeders ofthe glacier 

The glacier is formed by the meeting of two ice sstrams from gorges, one comeing from the north-west and the other nearly from the east, and which 

From " A description of the glacier of the pindar and Kuphini river in the Kumaon Himalaya " by Licutement R.Strachay, Ben Eng., J.A.S.B.. xvi 794 and "Note the motion of the glacier of the Pindar in Kumaon "  by the same.Ibid xvii., ii., 208 and given as nearly as possible in the writer's worda as the only scicutitic examiustion of these glacier that we possess.                        